Title: Jsw Steel Ltd vs The Board Of Trustees Of The Mumbai Port ... on 14 February, 2025
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/docfragment/74834511/?formInput=doctypes%3A%20supremecourt%20year%3A%202025
Date Extracted: 2025-03-17 16:20:59

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member Services -- Sign up today and get free trial for one month.
Supreme Court of India
Jsw Steel Ltd vs The Board Of Trustees Of The Mumbai Port ... on 14 February, 2025
Author: Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra
                                                            1

                                                                               REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 257                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                               [@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.15490 OF 2021]

        JSW STEEL LTD.                                                          APPELLANT

                                                       VERSUS

        THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE MUMBAI PORT TRUST
        MUMBAI & ORS.                                                         RESPONDENTS

        R1: THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE MUMBAI PORT TRUST MUMBAI
        R2: M/S. N.S. GUZDAR & CO.
        R3: M/S SHIVAM ENTERPRISES
        R4: UNITED INDIA INSURANCE COMPANY LTD.



                                                   O    R       D   E   R



                     AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH & PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, JJ.



                            Leave granted. Heard learned senior counsel/counsel for the

        parties.

        BACKGROUND:

        2.                  The appellant is aggrieved by the Impugned Order, by which

        Writ Petition No.2127/1996 filed by it before the High Court was

        disposed of. The High Court noted that the said writ petition

        principally sought the following reliefs:

                            ‘(a) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to issue a Writ
   Signature Not Verified
                            of prohibition or a writ in the nature of prohibition or
   Digitally signed by
   ARJUN BISHT
   Date: 2025.02.21         any other appropriate writ, order or direction under
   14:55:47 IST
   Reason:                  Article 226 of the Constitution of India, prohibiting the
                            Respondents from insisting upon the Petitioners to remove
                            the wreck of SATYAM or take any steps in that behalf
                            and/or to deposit any amounts as costs of such wreck
                                              2

     removal;
     (b)   For   a   permanent   injunction   restraining the
     Respondents, their servants and agents from taking any
     steps   against  the   Petitioners   and  preventing the
     Petitioners from availing of the services of the Mumbai
     Port Trust and its waters for the purpose of safely
     transitting their barges containing iron ore being moved
     from the mother vessel to Dharamtar jetty;’

3.   The writ petition has been disposed of by the High Court in

the following terms:

     ‘(i) We permit the Respondent No.1 Mumbai Port Trust to
     withdraw the amount deposited in this Court by the
     Petitioner alongwith accrued interest without prejudice to
     the rights and contentions of the parties;
     (ii) Inasmuch there are disputed facts involved and since
     the Petition is now rendered infructuous, it could be open
     for the Petitioner to file a suit against the Respondents
     for refund/recovery of Rs.70,00,000/- alongwith accrued
     interest, if so advised. The remedies of the Respondent
     No.1 Mumbai Port Trust to recover further amounts, if any,
     are also kept open;
     (iii) The Writ Petition and the Notice of Motion are
     disposed of in the aforesaid terms. There shall be no
     order as to costs.’

SUBMISSIONS:

4.   Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the crux

of the issue is as to whether the appellant is liable to pay the

charges for removal of the wreck of a barge (‘Satyam’) belonging to

respondent     no.3       (M/s    Shivam   Engineers)       which   capsized       while

ferrying   iron     ore    from    the   ship    of   the   appellant   to   the   port

concerned. Learned counsel drew the attention of this Court to the

Notice/Communication dated 19.04.1995 issued by the then Deputy

Conservator    of     respondent     no.1,       which   specifically   states     that
                                                        3

power under Section 14(1)1 of the Indian Ports Act, 19082 was being

exercised and the appellant (in its then avatar as ‘M/s Nippon

Denro Ispat Ltd.’) was called upon ‘to deposit a sum Rs.70 lakhs3

as adequate security to ensure that the said wreck has been raised

or removed within the stipulated period’.4 It was submitted that

though the appellant had deposited the amount, the question was as

to whether it was liable since Section 14(1) of the Act places

liability on the owner of the vessel concerned and, admittedly, in

the present position, the owner of the vessel was respondent no.3

and not the appellant. It was further contended that the High Court

disposed of the writ petition on the erroneous presumption that it

has      become       infructuous           and      that        the    parties        (appellant         and

respondent          no.1      inter-se)         have       the     remedy      to    recover        further

amount(s), which was kept open. It was submitted that once the law

is clear as to on whom the liability for the wreckage or its

removal lies, the appellant could not be saddled with the cost

therefor. Lastly, it was urged that the further direction in favour

of      respondent         no.1      to     encash         Rs.70       lakhs    (alongwith          accrued
1
  ‘14. Raising or removal of wreck impeding navigation within limits of port.—(1) If any vessel is
wrecked, standard or sunk in any port in such a manner as to impede or likely to impede any navigation
thereof, the conservator shall give notice to the owner of the vessel to raise, remove or destroy the vessel
within such period as may be specified in the notice and to furnish such adequate security to the satisfaction
of the conservator to ensure that the vessel shall be raised, removed or destroyed within the said period:
       Provided that the conservator may extend such period to such further period as he may consider ne-
cessary having regard to the circumstances of such case and the extent of its impediment to navigation.
         xxx’
2
    Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’.
3
    Under Section 14(3) of the Act, which reads as under:
        ‘(3) The expenses and further sum aforesaid shall be payable to the conservator out of the sale-pro -
ceeds of the property, and the balance shall be paid to the person entitled to the property recovered, or, if no
such person appears and claims the balance, shall be held in deposit for payment, without interest, to any
person thereafter establishing his right thereto:
         Provided that the person makes his claim within three years from the date of the sale.’
4
    The stipulated period was 30 days.
                                         4

interest), deposited by the appellant pursuant to earlier order(s)

of the High Court, is totally unjustified in law.

5.    Per contra, learned counsel for respondent no.1 submits that

the High Court has merely closed the issue as 20 years had passed.

It   was   submitted    that   the   wreckage      has   already   been   cleared.

Learned counsel also advanced that the right of the appellant has

been safeguarded, inasmuch as, it has the right to move a suit,

where    the   dues,   if   any,   against   the    parties   concerned    can   be

thrashed out.

DECISION:

6.    Having considered the matter, we find merit in the submissions

put forth by the appellant. The way the High Court approached the

issue appears to be erroneous for the simple reason that the lis

was very much alive, as a pure question of law stood raised i.e.,

on whom the liability for clearing the wreckage was to be fastened.

The Impugned Order has not dealt with this fundamental issue. When

on a purely legal issue, the appellant raised a legal objection,

and also deposited the amount demanded by respondent no.1 in the

High Court, in our considered view, the High Court was required to

answer the question of law. In this analysis, no exercise was

required involving disputed factual questions. Moreover, the efflux

of time is a result of systemic delay, not due to any laches on the

part of the appellant.

7.      Our view on the aspects of (a) lapse of time alone not being a

ground to close the matter, and (b) adjudicating a petition under

Article 226 when it does not really involve a disputed factual

setting, finds support from the decisions of this Court, extracted
                                         5

below:

B S Hari Commandant v Union of India, (2023) 13 SCC 779:

     ‘51. Article 226 of the Constitution is a succour to
     remedy injustice, and any limit on exercise of such power,
     is only self-imposed. Gainful reference can be made to,
     amongst others, A.V. Venkateswaran v. Ramchand Sobhraj
     Wadhwani [A.V. Venkateswaran v. Ramchand Sobhraj Wadhwani,
     1961 SCC OnLine SC 16: (1962) 1 SCR 753: AIR 1961 SC 1506]
     and U.P.   State   Sugar   Corpn.  Ltd. v. Kamal    Swaroop
     Tandon [U.P. State Sugar Corpn. Ltd. v. Kamal Swaroop
     Tandon, (2008) 2 SCC 41: (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 352]. The High
     Courts, under the constitutional scheme, are endowed with
     the ability to issue prerogative writs to safeguard rights
     of citizens. For exactly this reason, this Court has never
     laid down any straitjacket principles that can be said to
     have “cribbed, cabined and confined” [to borrow the term
     employed by the Hon. Bhagwati, J. (as he then was) in E.P.
     Royappa v. State of T.N. [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N.,
     (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 165] ], the extraordinary
     powers   vested  under   Articles  226   or  227   of   the
     Constitution. Adjudged on the anvil of Nawab Shaqafath Ali
     Khan [Nawab Shaqafath Ali Khan v. Nawab Imdad Jah Bahadur,
     (2009) 5 SCC 162: (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 421], this was a fit
     case for the High Court to have examined the matter
     threadbare, more so, when it did not involve navigating a
     factual minefield.’
                                            (emphasis supplied)

Union Territory of Ladakh v Jammu               and     Kashmir    National
Conference, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1140:

     ‘32. The Court would categorically emphasize that no
     litigant should have even an iota of doubt or an
     impression (rather, a misimpression) that just because of
     systemic delay or the matter not being taken up by the
     Courts resulting in efflux of time the cause would be
     defeated, and the Court would be rendered helpless to
     ensure justice to the party concerned…’
                                             (emphasis supplied)

8.   In the above circumstances, we are unable to sustain the order

impugned. Accordingly, the same is set aside. WP No.2127/1996 is

revived. The matter is remanded to the High Court to consider all

issues on merits as raised in the writ petition. As the monies

deposited   by   the   appellant      are   stated    to   have   already     been

withdrawn   by   respondent   no.1,    were   the    appellant    to   eventually
                                            6

succeed    in    the   writ    petition,   the    appellant    would   be   suitably

compensated on this score.

9.    Having regard to the fact that the writ petition is of the

year 1996, we request the High Court to give priority to the matter

and dispose it of as expeditiously as possible. Our request is to

be construed in line with Tirupati Balaji Developers (P) Ltd. v

State of Bihar, (2004) 5 SCC 1. Parties are not precluded from

raising any question(s) of law and fact.

10.   The appeal stands allowed in the afore-mentioned terms.

11.       I.A.    Diary       No.40046/2024      (seeking    impleadment)     stands

disposed of with the observation that it shall be open to the

applicant/proposed respondent to make such prayer before the High

Court, which may consider the same as per law. Remaining I.A.s

stand closed forthwith, in view of the appeal itself being allowed.




                                                            ……………………………………………………J.
                                                            [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]




                                                       …………………………………………………………J.
                                                       [PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]


NEW DELHI
14 FEBRUARY 2025
                                       7

ITEM NO.40                      COURT NO.17                SECTION IX

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

       Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.15490/2021

[Arising out of the Impugned Final Judgment and Order dated 13-08-
2021 in WP No.2127/1996 passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Bombay]

JSW STEEL LTD.                                             Petitioner
                                VERSUS
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE MUMBAI PORT TRUST
MUMBAI & ORS.                                             Respondents

[IA No.124670/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT
IA No.124669/2021 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES IA No.133155/2021 - STAY APPLICATION] Date : 14-02-2025 This matter was taken up for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA For Petitioner(s) Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Mahesh Agarwal, Adv. Mr. Rishi Agrawala, Adv. Ms. Aanchal Mullick, Adv. Ms. Kamakshi Sehgal, Adv. Mr. Rohan Sharma, Adv. Mr. E. C. Agrawala, AoR For Respondent(s) Mr. Abhishek Puri, Adv.
Ms. Surbhi Gupta, Adv. Mr. Sahil Grewal, Adv. Mrs. Reeta Dewan Puri, Adv. Mr. P. N. Puri, AoR Mr. Apoorv Shukla, AoR Mr. Puneet Chahar, Adv. Ms. Prabhleen A. Shukla, Adv.
UPON hearing Counsel, the Court passed the following O R D E R Leave granted.
2. Heard learned senior counsel/counsel for the parties.
3. The appeal stands allowed in terms of the signed reportable order (hereinafter referred to as the ‘order’).
4. The pending applications are dealt with in the manner indicated in the order.
(SAPNA BISHT) (MAMTA RANI) COURT MASTER (SH) COURT MASTER (NSH) [Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file.]